What are Recommender Systems?

Ever wondered why people end up spending hours on Youtube or Tiktok, or ever wondered why someone ends up purchasing more than one product on e-commerce websites even when it wasn’t the initial plan, this is because of the power that modern day recommendation systems yield. Recommending another product when a product is being sold has been a phenomenon from the time when the first product was sold. But the most stark change that we are witnessing today is the scale at which it is being done. The factor that contributes most to this is computing power that is available at our disposal. Industries can now harness the power of Big Data, utilizing relevant data that would be in Terabytes. Recommendation has evolved with time, earlier products or services were recommended on the basis of the  larger picture which the company sees i.e. Demography based, Gender Based, Color Based etc. But now, companies are able to offer personalized recommendations to an individual thereby increasing a customer lifetime value. One of the key challenges of recommendation systems is trying to find what sort of recommender strategy to use.
Home-page recommender system strategy that provides extremely personalized recommendations to users. Companies like Google, Facebook, Twitter use this approach to generates personalized recommendations
 Related item recommender system is the simpler model and requires less computational resources. It finds products that are closely related to each other and recommends on the basis of it. Startups and Companies that cannot spend a huge sum of money use this model. 

To summarize, be it any industry, retail or video streaming, new products, videos, apps and more are being fed into the system at a very large scale and to incorporate these new inputs, we need algorithms which can recommend relevant things to every user.

